Treatment for Cirrhosis consists in: 
Supportive care
In general, treatment is supportive and includes stopping injurious medications, providing nutrition (including supplemental vitamins), and treating the underlying disorders and complications. Doses of medications metabolized in the liver should be reduced. All alcohol and hepatotoxic substances must be avoided. Withdrawal symptoms during hospitalization should be anticipated in patients who have cirrhosis and have continued their chronic use of alcohol. Patients should be vaccinated against viral hepatitis A and B unless they are already immune.
Patients with varices need therapy to prevent bleeding (see Portal Hypertension: Treatment). Patients with compensated cirrhosis who have clinically significant portal hypertension (according to the Baveno VII criteria) should be started on a nonselective beta-blocker to prevent decompensation (1). Carvedilol is the preferred nonselective beta-blocker due to greater benefit compared with other nonselective beta-blockers (eg, propranolol) and improved survival. If the patient is not a candidate for a nonselective beta-blocker, upper endoscopy should be performed. Medium and large esophageal varices should be treated prophylactically with endoscopic banding (ligation). If gastric varices are not amenable to endoscopic banding and the patient is not a candidate for nonselective beta-blockers, balloon-occluded retrograde transvenous obliteration or endoscopic cyanoacrylate injection may be used.
Trans jugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting (TIPS) should be considered if patients have complications of portal hypertension that are refractory to standard treatments, including ascites and recurrent variceal bleeding. TIPS is relatively contraindicated in patients with heart failure, moderate or severe pulmonary hypertension, or hepatic encephalopathy. Patients with high MELD scores (> 18) have a higher risk of mortality after TIPS.
Liver transplantation is indicated for patients with end-stage liver disease or HCC. Risk of death without liver transplantation begins to exceed risks of transplantation (eg, perioperative complications, chronic immunosuppression) when the MELD score is more than about 15. Thus, if the score is ≥ 15, if the patient's HCC meets the criteria for MELD exception point, or if cirrhosis has decompensated clinically, patients should be referred to a transplantation center.
